[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The Order of the
Temple of Solomon
had been founded in the
aftermath of the First Crusade,
a Christian military
expedition which
had captured Jerusalem
from the Muslims.
The first Templars had
dedicated their lives to God
by protecting
pilgrims, but the Order
had soon proved itself to be
the most effective military unit
in the crusading army.
[BATTLE SOUNDS]
At the Horns of Hattin,
the Templar knights
had been singled out by
Saladin and almost eliminated
from the Holy Land.
But in their short
60-year existence,
the Templars had constructed
an enormous support network
throughout Western Europe
that provided the front line
with men and supplies.
In fact, this
elite military unit
had created for
itself the world's
first multinational corporation.
Since the Order of
the Temple had first
been established early
in the 12th century,
it had set out to attract
recruits and raise funds.
Although an individual
knight could own nothing,
he still needed horses,
weaponry, and servants
if he was to carry out
God's work effectively.
The king of Jerusalem had
initially aided the Templars.
Among the many
reasons for doing so
was the knowledge that visiting
pilgrims brought much needed
income to the fledgling
Crusader states.
Pilgrims required food and
lodging, they paid road tolls,
and they brought gifts.
From the very
beginning, the Templars
were entirely comfortable
with the economic realities
of serving God in the Holy Land.
The Templar
corporation, or network,
began in Western
Europe, built up
from gifts of land donated
by men and women who
wanted to protect their
immortal souls by supporting
the Crusaders in the Holy Land.
Many of the earliest donations
received by the Templars
were from men who wanted to
join the Order themselves.
One of the most
substantial donors
came from Champagne
in Northern France.
>>Hugh Count of Champagne
joined the Order in the 1120s.
And he was one of its
earliest important patrons.
But once he joined the
Order, he lost the status
that came with being an
important territorial ruler.
He had to abrogate his own
will to that of the Master.
And he had to live the
life of an ordinary knight.
So one gave up a considerable
amount, in terms of status
and in material comfort, in
order to become a Templar.
But if you sincerely believe
that what really matters
is your immortal soul, and not
your short and transitory life
on earth, then it would
be seen as worth it.
>>The Templars gratefully
accepted many such gifts
of land, which were channelled
into productive communities
where the brothers in the
West lived and worked.
It was these communities,
called preceptories,
that became the bedrock
of the Templar network.
>>I think that the Templars
gave a good deal of thought
to the best way of exploiting
their Western preceptories
for the purposes of supporting
their military front line.
But it's not entirely easy
to do this consistently,
since by their very nature,
donations tend to be random.
As time went on,
they tried quite
hard to rationalize
their holdings
in a way which would
make them more effective.
And even, in some
areas, to provide
preceptories which were rather
specialist-- perhaps specialist
in banking or in stud
farms or in providing
shipping and so on.
>>A typical rural preceptory of
the Templars usually comprised
of farmland centered
around to manor house,
with any numbers of barns,
stables, and outhouses
depending on the size
and location of the farm.
No entire preceptories
remain today,
but many individual
buildings do.
These enormous barns were
constructed by the Knights
Templar more than 800 years ago.
The aim of all Templar
preceptories was to make money.
A third of all income went to
the knights on the frontier.
Every donation, large
or small, was fully
exploited for maximum revenue.
If they were given
unused land, they
had it settled and cultivated.
New mills, wine
presses, and ovens
were constructed to soak up
the extra agricultural produce.
And new village and town
markets were created.
In this way, the economy
of an entire region
could steadily be boosted.
But it also meant
that the Templars
could take economic
control of whole areas
as they bought up
businesses and land.
In the Champagne town of
Prova, the Knights Templar
would eventually own
more than 70 properties.
The Templars were always
improving their market
position, and their
dominance always
caused considerable resentment
among both peasants and land
holders.
To their rivals, the Templars
had one particularly unfair
advantage: their holdings
were exempt taxes or tithes.
>>It was normal
for the population,
in one form or
another, to pay tithes.
The Templars were granted
an exemption from tithe
on the land they acquired, which
enabled them to grow, perhaps,
more rapidly than they
would have done before.
So in that sense, they are
not paying the proportion
of their income into the
church, which you might normally
have expected them
to have to do.
Again, the justification
here is that the money
is being contributed
towards the church.
It's been contributed
towards the Holy War.
I think, inevitably, however,
when somebody gets a privilege,
somebody else
objects to the fact
that they have a privilege.
>>Within 30 years
of its foundation,
the Temple was managing
farms and urban properties
throughout France, England,
and much of Europe.
They had a European headquarters
in Paris and London.
Many of the Templar properties
on the Iberian Peninsula
were fortified, as the Muslims
retained a strong presence
on the Spanish mainland.
The Templar network provided
security and lodgings
all along the main
trade routes of Europe,
as well as to the Holy Land.
Some of their most
important offices
were at the main
Mediterranean ports.
The Temple was involved in
shipping from its earliest
days.
It had soon extended
its role from protecting
the pilgrims in the
East to protecting
pilgrims traveling to the East.
The Order constructed
an early travel agency,
providing pilgrims with not
just security, but transport
and accommodation.
At first, the Order
had chartered vessels
from the great seafaring
cities of Italy.
But once again,
the Temple decided
to improve its market position.
It built its own
ships and consolidated
its long-distance
travel business,
an industry it had helped to
create in the first place.
One of the Temple's most
important income generating
regions was on the main access
linking the great Mediterranean
and northern European
trading zones.
The Champagne region of France,
one of the Temple heartlands,
was a bridge between
north and south Europe.
It was here that enormous
trade fairs developed,
which ushered in the dawn
of international business.
The great trade
fairs of Champagne
saw the exchange of goods
from all over Europe,
which the Templars could
not fail to benefit from.
The economic boom also triggered
a financial revolution,
which saw the birth
of modern banking.
The Templars were well-placed
to enter the world of banking.
They had offices
all over Europe.
And their continuous
state of warfare
had given the Templars
the experience
of handling large sums of money.
>>One of the reasons why the
Templars were effective bankers
was that people trusted them.
And they trusted them not only
because of their integrity,
but also because they
had the physical means
to defend the money
which they held.
They had castles, and
they had armed men
who could accompany any
movement of actual specie
if that was required.
And they maintained
their reputation
for paying when required
and for honest dealing.
And in that sense,
therefore, the Templars
were successful as bankers.
The Templar Bank in Paris
performed most of the functions
that one would associate with
a modern bank, it made loans.
You could deposit money there.
It actually had
an open cash desk,
which was open many
days of the year,
particularly when it was most
needed at times when payments
were being made at the end
of the harvest and so on.
It kept separate
accounts for people.
It was involved in the
transfer of currencies.
It was involved in investment.
So most of the functions
you would associate
with a modern bank can be
seen, at least in the Templar
banks in Paris and
in London, and also
in a number of other
places, as well.
They also, perhaps,
went beyond some
of the functions
of a modern bank.
You could say that they
were performing functions
you would associate with
a modern accountancy
firm, in that they would
audit the account of the King
of France, for instance.
[CHURCH BELLS RINGING]
>>The Templars'
unparalleled financial
acumen and entrepreneurial drive
had brought the warrior monks
untold wealth.
The Order had risen to the
very pinnacle of society.
And they didn't just work
for the French crown.
The Templars provided
security and financial advice
to most of Europe's
great rulers,
including the King of
England and the Pope.
But for many observers,
there was a difference
between what the Templars
were supposed to be,
poor knights of Christ
battling with the infidel,
and what they appeared
to be, hugely wealthy
aristocrats with
royal connections.
Although a third of all revenue
provided by the Templar network
was sent to the East,
few ordinary people
ever saw their Holy
Land activities.
All most people ever
heard about the Crusades
was a growing catalog of
defeat and humiliation.
The Crusaders had lost
the Christian holy sites,
which was the primary aim
of the Knights Templar.
Their frequent setbacks in the
Holy Land made many suspicious.
How could they
justify such riches
when they were supposed to
be poor knights battling
Islam for the love of God alone?
For years, medieval
chroniclers had
suspected that financial motives
affected all Templar behavior
in the Holy Land.
A castle siege
might be interpreted
as a bid for gold and plunder.
Or a refusal to join an assault
could be seen as saving costs.
There were many such
controversial incidents.
>>One of these is the
capture of a man called
Nasir el Din, who was
fleeing from a failed
political coup in Egypt
in 1154, was captured
by the Latin
Christians, and was put
into the custody
of the Templars.
The Templars then sold him
back to his political enemies
in Egypt for a large sum,
and he was killed by the mob.
The story that is told
by some chroniclers
is that this man, however, was
interested in being converted
to Christianity.
And this doesn't go down
very well on the Templars.
It looks as if they're
more interested in gaining
the ransom money
than in conversion.
>>But the Templars did
not always take the money.
Soon after their construction
of a new castle on the Jordan
frontier, they
received a visitor.
>>The Muslim leader
Saladin came and tried
to purchase the
castle from France.
He offered them a huge sum
of money, 60,000 gold coins.
And the Knights Templar
refused to sell the castle.
He granted his offer
to 100,000 gold coins.
And the Knights
Templar, as usual,
boldly refused the offer.
They didn't know that
within a few months
not only that they will
lose the 100,000 gold coins,
they'll lose the castle
and their lives, as well.
>>The Templars obsession with
raising money was well-founded.
And their cautious
policy in the East
was based on a simple formula.
Before the Battle of
Hattin, it took the income
from 30 manor farms
to equip and maintain
one single knight
in the Holy Land.
More than 200 had
died at Hattin.
Within a few decades, the cost
would have risen five-fold.
>>The Templars needed to
translate their economic empire
into a military machine
of some kind, which
was very, very expensive.
The numbers of knights
probably amounted to 600.
Each of those knights
needed to have four horses.
In addition, there were
probably another 2,000,
2,500 sergeants, or serving
brothers, some of whom fought,
and many more people who acted
as part of the general support
system, like squires,
servants, cooks.
And also a limited
number of clerics.
So there's a large amount of--
a large number of men and horses
and other animals that
you needed to pay for.
So the costs of
this are immense.
Which is why, in
the 13th century,
the Templars have got to exploit
their lands to their fullest
extent.
This in turn, of course, can
sometimes lead to unpopularity,
particularly if there's
no military success
to show for all this
vast expenditure.
But like most
merchant machines, it
seems as if money is being
thrown down a bottomless pit,
to those people who are
being forced to pay for it.
>>A Crusader knight's
single most expensive item
was his horse.
The Templar force
in the Holy Land
would have required about
4,000 horses, most of which
would have come from
the Western network.
The Muslims understood
the economy of war
as well as the Templars.
And in battle, targeted
to Crusaders' horses.
>>In some of the sources,
even the contemporary sources,
the Turkish and Saracen
habit of attacking the horses
was regarded, almost,
as unsporting.
Now this has being picked up
in the 19th century and even
today, as somehow,
they-- the Turks
and the Saracens--
are being devious.
I have to say, this
is somewhat unfair,
because they're entering
battle to win the battle.
And if you can defeat
your enemy by injuring
his horse or his horses,
or frightening his horses,
you don't have to kill the man.
You're not there, as far as a
Saracenic warrior is concerned,
to achieve personal glory.
You're there as a
professional soldier
with a rather modern attitude
towards the job in hand,
and that is to succeed.
>>Saladin's capture
of Jerusalem had
triggered a wave of crusading
enthusiasm throughout Europe.
The Holy City would
once again be the target
of a major Christian expedition.
For the Templars,
the new Crusade
was the first
opportunity since Hattin
to translate its massive
economic resources
into a military machine.
The Order of the Temple was
integral to the Third Crusade,
led by the King of England
Richard of the Lionheart,
and Philip II of France.
The remnants of the crusade
estate in the Holy Land,
on the arrival of
the Third Crusade,
existed around the
three remaining cities:
Antioch, Tripoli, and Tyre-- all
supported by sea from Sicily.
Richard joined Philip II
and the resident crusaders
already besieging
the port of Acre,
which they captured
in July 1191.
The Crusaders then began
the march on Jerusalem
and set off down the coast.
A fleet shadowed
their every move,
providing supplies
and reinforcements.
The army was constantly
harried by Saladin's forces,
but the Crusaders made progress,
clawing back Haifa and then
Caesarea.
On the road to Arsur,
Saladin attacked in strength.
The Crusaders lined up with
the discipline military orders
in the vital stations.
The Muslim attack was driven
off by a powerful crusader
counterattack.
Richard's victory
over Saladin meant
the crusade estate was once
more firmly established
in the Holy Land.
Richard took Jaffa,
but Jerusalem itself
was just too vulnerable
to Muslim attacks.
The Templars had played
an essential role
in the Third Crusade,
providing logistical support,
but, mainly, as a coherent
discipline military outfit
Richard I could rely
on at all times.
>>Whatever his many faults,
Richard did commit resources
and, indeed, risked his own
life and health many times
for the cause of the Crusades.
And I think he discerned the
Templars were equally prepared
to make that commitment.
The Master of the Templar,
Gerard de Ridefort, died.
There was a vacancy
in the Mastership.
And Richard wished to extend
his influence in that direction,
and managed to secure
the election of one
of his own vassals, a man called
Robert of Sable, as Master.
And from then on,
there was a kind
of close link between
the Temple and Richard.
And they became a
very important part
of his army after the taking
of Acre and the march south
towards, supposedly,
towards Jerusalem,
but which never, in
fact, took Jerusalem.
>>Richard the Lionhearted
travelled to withing sight
of the Holy City.
But taking advice from
his military advisers,
including the
cautious Templars, he
had decided not to risk
an attack on the city.
One year later, Richard
negotiated a treaty
with Saladin, which
allowed Christian pilgrims
to visit the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre.
Although the Third
Crusade had failed
to gain control of Jerusalem,
the victories of Richard I
had rejuvenated
the Crusader states
and given the Christians
a firm foundation
from which to begin expansion.
The Templars immediately began
an enormous building program
that would continue for decades.
The Templars created
their new headquarters
in the Port of
Acre, which became
the new capital of the
Christian Holy Land
for the military orders and
the Italian trading cities.
Much of the Hospitallers'
compound exists today.
But little remains of
Acre's Templar quarter.
This enormous tunnel,
constructed beneath the city,
is just one testament to
the effort and resources
the Knights Templar must
have invested in the East.
When Saladin died in
1193, the Islamic world
once more crumbled
into disunity.
Islam's failure to unite
against the Christians
would buy the Crusaders
much needed breathing space.
But the Christians
could never entirely
rely on Muslim divisions.
For the Templars, recent
success came with a price.
The massive investment needed
to man and fortify the newly
recovered lands meant expanding
the network, a corporation that
was growing evermore unpopular.
>>The Templars' reputation
tended to take a bit of a knock
back in Europe, rather
than in the Middle East.
Because back in
Europe is where they
are coming to be seen as
rich, almost money-grubbing.
They became bankers, and
nobody likes bankers.
So there was a
jealousy, a resentment.
But this is not
immediately transferred
through those who are stationed
out there on the frontier,
manning the castle
walls, and so on.
>>One place where the
Templars unpopularity actually
deteriorated into violence
was on the island of Cyprus.
In an awesome display of
their wealth and resources,
the Templars had purchased
this entire country
from King Richard, who had
conquered the island en route
to Palestine.
>>However, Richard realized that
he couldn't govern it himself,
and he couldn't hold it himself.
And therefore, he
turned to the Templars
as possible rulers
of this island.
And he sold the
island to the Templars
for a large sum of money.
Unfortunately,
the Templars never
committed sufficient troops
and resources to governing it.
And after quite a
short time, there
was a revolt, which
the Templars survived,
but which they--
which was enough
to deter them from wanting
to hold it any longer.
The Cyprus is a very
interesting case,
because had the Templars
taken it more seriously
as a resource, it could have
been the first semi-sovereign
or sovereign state ruled
by a military order.
It never came out like
that, but it could've been.
>>However hard the
knights struggled
to justify the vast funds
needed to reconstruct and man
the defenses of the
Holy Land, the Templars
would never fully
shake off the suspicion
that they cared more for the
acquisition of gold and riches
than they did for
the land of Christ.
In reality, whether the
Templars believed it or not,
the equation was simple.
If they could not maintain
the Crusader states,
there was no reason
for their existence.
The Templars' credibility
depended entirely
on the survival of a
Christian Holy Land.
[MUSIC PLAYING]